Gender disparities in scientific funding


It is a known fact that women are dramatically underrepresented in academia especially the higher level of the academic pyramid. Thus identifying the underlying causes of this bias would serve as the first step to inform policy makers and funding agencies to provide a more balanced distribution of resources, leading to a more inclusive environment for all to participate and prosper. In this study, I use the extensive NIH grant dataset expanding from 1950 to current time. I aim to investigate the distribution of the gender disparities across different fields and location. The historical dataset allows us to explore how the grant distribution has changed over the past 5 decades as well as comparing how different disciplines have performed differently over this time period. 

My primary analysis indicates that, while men and women are receiving grants at the same rate across different states, the amount per grant is significantly different in some states, in favor of men. This can explain the underrepresentation of women in the more senior role in academia. Assuming that larger grants are more likely to be awarded to the bigger lab with more senior faculty, the observation that men are receiving these grant disproportionally higher than women indicates that more men are able to hold and manage larger labs. However, further analysis and hypothesis testing are required to make this case more rigid. I am also planning to study the gender distribution across different disciplines. One can also look at the size of the investigator team and explore the nature of cooperation and how men and women play differently in the team setting. Also, the gender of the program director as one of the most influential decision maker in choosing the grant recipients is an interesting avenue to explore.   
